

﻿Research Statement (Explain your research in the last 5 years in 2000 characters)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 For the last five years, my research has focused in the emerging field of movement ecology, aimed to reveal the complex drivers of animal movement (humans included) and their spreading patterns.
       Currently, movement research is living a revolution. Improved tracking technology (GPS, bio-loggers, smart-phones) promises to do for movement ecology what DNA sequencing did for molecular genetics. The field is crying out for an integrative view, with new computational tools and modeling frameworks to understand such unprecedented levels of detail from a constantly growing number of species. My aim has been to contribute and foster this scientific revolution based on a broad,  highly collaborative and interdisciplinary research program, founded on the solid grounds of statistical physics,  mathematical ecology, and computational and quantitative biology. 
        A central question in movement research is how animals use information and their ability to move to promote search  success. I develop random walk and generalized diffusion theory to cast the problem of the emergence of optimal stochastic search patterns in combination with  model organisms experiments, e.g. ants (N.Franks, U.Bristol), locusts (I.Couzin, U.Princeton), nematodes (W.Ryu, U.Toronto), to unravel the structural complexity of search behavior, ultimately modulated by the ongoing interweaving of animals’ internal states and complex sensory-motor systems. The mechanistic linkage between behavioral processes and movement patterns is also key to understand globalised problems such as disease spreading or human society inequalities (differential access to resources, exposure to hazards). In this context, I develop quantitative methods to analyze massive high-resolution migratory datasets to generate a world-wide early warning system for vector-borne infectious diseases (M.Wikelski, Max Planck for Ornithology). I also started novel citizen science approaches using smart-phones, web-mapping, and information and communication technologies to build up alert-systems of invasive species (e.g. Asian Tiger Mosquito), and to study human mobility at the intersection of ecology and the social sciences.


Statement of purpose (Brief statement of purpose explaining the choice of your institution and your future research plans in 3000 characters)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The structural complexity of movement behavior emerges from localized interactions and selection processes acting at lower levels of biological organisation (e.g. genetics, neurobiology, metabolism) that, in turn, are structured in modules (e.g. motor, sensory, and internal modules).
Accurate control of sensory inputs and internal states of animals in the field is overwhelmingly difficult, and that limits the possibility to build-up mechanistic links between animal behaviour and movement patterns. I plan to further study  the organizational principles and the evolutionary constraints of animal search behaviour and/or information use, in experimental systems with a tight control over the nature of the environmental cues (e.g. thermo-landscapes) and the internal states and the sensory aptitudes of the animal (e.g. motor or sensory mutants, neuronal laser ablation, optogenetics). 

Knowledge on how animals use information and their ability to move in order to promote encounter success can be the cornerstone for constructing a unifying theory and an integrative paradigm of organism movement. In addition, a comprenhensive view of the general search/encounter problem can generate direct applications (biorobotics, bioinformatics), and improve the predictive power of baseline movement/dispersal modeling with consequences for fields as diverse as epidemics, invasion ecology, or conservation biology. In this regard, also crucial is to cope with the sudden generation of massive, high-resolution, movement research databases. In the context of Movebank (www.movebank) and the ICARUS Initiative (http://icarusinitiative.org/project) I develop novel data mining methodologies to behaviorally segment massive, high-resolution trajectories and biotelemetric data (e.g. heart rate, tri-axial accelerometry) with the final goal of providing a world-wide early warning system for vector-borne infectious diseases. I am also using smart-phones technology and citizens science approaches to study human mobility (social segregation,inequality),  and/or human-vectorized  biological invasions (e.g. Asian Tiger Mosquito). 

My major research competences involve the mechanistic modelling of animal movement and dispersal patterns. CEAB is a strong center on invasion biology, conservation biology, molecular ecology, with many labs working on spatial or georeferenced ecological problems. There is infrastucture to build up experiments with living organisms on spatial extended arenas. Because of its relative small size, the center has the potential to generate a tight community with a high-level of interaction and consensus on future common goals and/or added-values, being the recently created group on Theoretical and Computational Ecology (Bartumeus and Alonso) an example. This is the first group of this kind in our institution (CSIC). Our group is a multidisciplinary research group that provides general theoretical foundations of observational and empirical research. Since both Dr. Alonso and I enjoy expiring contracts, the success of our group depends, critically, on the possibility of stabilizing our positions in CEAB. An ICREA position would be a wonderful opportunity to develop my research lines in the center where I work.






